The Arctic climate is changing and the temperatures in the region are predicted
to increase much more rapidly than the global average. Water is here key; the
surface consists mainly of sea water, ice, or snow, and the weather is largely
determined by the humidity and clouds in the atmosphere. These water reservoirs
are not independent, atmospheric water and circulation are strongly influenced
by the distribution of sea ice, that in its turn is affected by e.g.\ clouds'
large influence on heat fluxes. This project will improve the use of satellite
microwave radiometry to follow this intricate interplay inside the climate
system. The primary objective is to provide better information on humidity, but
water in all forms is involved and contributions regarding liquid water
content, falling snow and sea ice variability are also foreseen. Sensors
supported by the project include SSMIS, MHS, ATMS, MWI and AWS.

To overcome the limitations in present retrievals, sophisticated 3D radiative
transfer and machine learning (ML) will be combined. In short, SAR imagery and
high resolution reanalysis data give input for simulating scenes of measured
brightness temperatures, that are used to train the ML algorithm. We are here
applying a methodology introduced by us, providing robust uncertainty estimates
in contrast to standard ML. By using input at high spatial resolution and
simulating scenes of satellite footprints, we avoid simplifications applied in
standard retrievals as well as in data assimilation. Most importantly, no
remapping of data is required and we can make use of the spatial information
contained in overlap between the footprints. We can also handle the case of an
inhomogeneous surface, that is required to provide accurate data over sea ice
leads and along coastlines. To our best knowledge, all these aspects are fully
novel. As a consequence, while other data users must reject large fractions of
the observations, our approach needs no filtering with respect to interference
of clouds and the surface. Albeit, some retrievals will have a poor precision,
but the ML approach will capture this and low weight can be given to those
cases in a statistically sane manner.

Both conically (SMMIS) and cross-track (such as ATMS) sensors will be
considered. All data, for several years, of one instrument of each type will be
processed, to provide retrieval datasets to be explored in e.g.\ climate
studies. The overall procedure requires a deep understanding of the physics
governing the observed radiances, knowledge that can be transferred to others
and we expect significant impact of the project on the assimilation of the same
data for weather forecasting. 



